---
layout: post
title: "A Call to (In)Action"
description: "Do it, if you're going to do it."
date: 2018-05-08
tags: think-piece, meditation
comments: true
---

I like to sit on the ground in the woods, away from the hustle and
bustle of school, work, and society. It reminds me that 99% of the stress
I feel in day to day life is completely artificial. Grades, money,
relationships, all of it is a game made up by humans that we choose to play
every day.

Nobody designed the woods. No one said, "this tree
looks best over here. Oh and this creek should run North-South to optimize
sunlight." And yet they're more beautiful than if someone had designed them.

The woods came from the same place we all did, arising from nature,
changing by its happenings, and inevitably declining and returning to it.
Whenever I remember that, I know that my life follows the same course. All the
things causing me stress are like the lightning strikes and forest fires that
shape the woods: painful, but also the agents of renewal and un-plannable
beauty.

While I love the woods, it can be a little hard to get far away from civilization
when I live in the heart of the Bay Area and don't have a car or multiple hours
to devote to travelling, so normally I try to find a secluded, woodsy area on
campus to meditate in.

On a campus of 35,000 students, though, there's bound to be situations where
unsuspecting people pass by me while I meditate. Normally, when a group notices
me, their conversation cuts off and they walk a little faster until they're
past. Their feeling of awkwardness is tangible.

When I put myself in their shoes, I can see why: it's weird in 2018 to see
someone completely alone doing absolutely nothing. It arouses suspicion;
Why is he not moving? Is he mentally stable? Will he attack me if I get close?

In the Age of the Internet, an era defined by its unrelenting connectedness
and limitless entertainment, where no one should ever be bored or lonely,
why would anyone ever choose to be unstimulated and alone? The funny thing is,
while we're more connected and stimulated than ever before, we're also plagued
by more boredom and loneliness than ever before.

Prolonged states of [anxiety](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/11/magazine/why-are-more-american-teenagers-than-ever-suffering-from-severe-anxiety.html)
and [depression](http://www.johnshopkinshealthreview.com/issues/fall-winter-2017/articles/the-rise-of-teen-depression)
in teens are increasing at alarming rates across the developed world, to levels higher
than ever before. Parents and medical professionals are desperately trying to find this
problem's source, but many turn a blind eye to the fact that
this increase aligns perfectly with the rise of the internet and social
media.

When we spend our time on the internet, refreshing feeds, watching netflix and
youtube, listening to podcasts, we're essentially doing nothing, but we're not:
we're being stimulated, we're receiving subconcious directives that we're
not as attractive or popular as so-and-so, that our lives *should* turn out like
the plot of a movie, that by buying the next, best thing we will finally be
happy. We're doing nothing, but we're always receiving external feedback.

Meditation, then, is the perfection of doing nothing. By sitting in silence, free
from stimulation, we rid ourselves of external feedback. By being fully aware,
we cease to identify with the thoughts that inevitably arise, thus ridding ourselves
of internal feedback as well (as anyone who's been through middle school knows,
our "inner critic" can be the most scathing).

Free from all feedback, we regain the ability to see things as they really are.
Life is no longer a struggle against the bad hands it deals you, but rather it
is a symphony, where tensions and resolutions necessarily come and go to create
a deeper beauty.

Take it from me; I've gone through extended bouts of depression for as long as
I can remember. In college, the depression got worse and worse, until it hit a
critical point in the form of an existential crisis out of which I emerged with
meditation. I never would've given any thought to it before, writing it off as
merely a trendy, feel-good kind of thing, but now I can't deny that it actually
works. Before, I didn't know how much I didn't know.

To wrap things up, I'd like to touch on the title of this blog, *Fac, si Facis*.
It's a Latin addage which means "Do it, if you're going to do it".

Throughout the day, when you find yourself on your phone killing time, cycling
between the same four apps you always check, try to put it away for five minutes
and use the time to observe. Notice your environment, notice your breathing,
and notice the thoughts that come and go. Don't engage in them, but simply sit
(or stand) and watch them happen.

As the devastating effects of climate change continue to manifest, the political
divide in America continues to deepen, and the world sits on the brink of World
War 3, we cannot continue to distract ourselves. Meditate, listen to the silence,
and you will know what is correct.

